Adventure Background

Dr. Cassee Dannell, a brilliant academic, long ago learned to hide her interest in the occult. She instead built a career gaining expertise in the peoples and cultures of the region surrounding Varkenbluff, continuing her occult research in secret. By age twenty-four, Dr. Dannell had earned her doctorate in anthropology from Varkenbluff University, a prestigious institution in her home city. Her ability to connect local archaeological objects with their cultural context was unrivaled, so after her graduation, Dr. Dannell became a Varkenbluff faculty member and field scientist, accompanying the university’s archaeology crews on digs in the area.

On a recent expedition into the nearby Murkmire, the archaeologists unearthed a strange object. Light green, opaque, and with a gemstone-like sheen, this ovoid stone was covered in strange furrows. The stone seemed ritualistic in nature, but it matched no recorded historical practices, and no one could identify its composition. The more Dr. Dannell studied it, the more she became convinced this object, which the archaeologists dubbed the Murkmire Stone, was not created by any known civilization—and might be dangerous.

Dr. Dannell tried to convince the dig’s archaeologists to isolate the Murkmire Stone until she could learn more about it, but word of the discovery spread quickly. When the Varkenbluff Museum of Natural History offered a generous price for the stone, it was soon whisked from the dig site to the museum.

Dr. Dannell continued to research the strange stone. Her concern turned to dread when she found descriptions of similar objects in her occult tomes. These objects were, in fact, the eggs of eldritch creatures. She learned that such eggs lay dormant for generations, but once the eggs are unearthed, the creatures within rapidly develop and hatch. The resulting creatures are ravenous for raw meat and grow exponentially as they feed, eventually overwhelming entire villages. The eggs are nearly indestructible, but the tomes claim encasing them in crystal can neutralize them.

According to Dr. Dannell’s research, the Murkmire Stone is due to hatch in a matter of days. She frantically presented her findings to the university’s administrators, who deemed her work pseudoscience and refused to interfere with the museum’s upcoming exhibition of the Murkmire Stone. Desperate, Dr. Dannell snuck into the museum after hours and tried to steal the stone, but she was caught. The university disavowed her actions and fired her. With mere hours left in the Murkmire Stone’s gestation period, Dr. Dannell is nearly out of options.