Loomlurch
Granny Nightshade’s lair is built around a twisted workshop carved out of the interior of a gigantic oak that has fallen over.

The workshop is operated by kidnapped children who are allowed a small measure of freedom to carry out their labors, under the watchful eyes of the hag’s minions.

Loomlurch has the following physical features:

Ceilings. Unless otherwise noted, ceilings throughout Loomlurch are 8 feet high.

Doors. Loomlurch’s doors are made of sturdy wood with iron handles and fittings. All doors are unlocked unless the text says otherwise. As an action, a character using thieves’ tools can make a successful DC 14 Dexterity check to pick the lock on a locked door, or a character can try to force a door open, doing so with a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check.

Floors, Walls, and Stairs. Floors, walls, and staircases are hewn out of the wood of the giant tree.

Windows. Loomlurch’s windows are openable but are latched shut from the inside.

Approaching Loomlurch
Describe Loomlurch to the players as their characters come within view of the site:

The forest is at its darkest here. Up ahead, a colossal dead oak lies on its side. Three living trees grow naturally out of its fallen remains. Their shapes resemble towers, with candlelit windows twinkling in the gloom and wooden balconies encircling gnarled branches. On one side of the fallen tree, firelight spills from a pair of quaint storefront windows, illuminating a clearing filled with merchant stalls.

Characters arrive near the root bridges (area L1). Anyone who observes the workshop (area L4) can see diminutive figures prowling around inside: kidnapped children and boggles.

DOUBLE, DOUBLE, TOIL AND TROUBLE

If the characters drive Bavlorna Blightstraw from her home in chapter 2, the hag takes refuge with her sister, Skabatha Nightshade, and spends all her time in the study (area L14), poring through Skabatha’s ritual books for a clever spell to overcome the characters or feeling sorry for herself. The two hags avoid each other as much as possible. Whenever they squabble, which is often, Skabatha ridicules her sister for Bavlorna’s failure at the hands of the characters.

Before the party enters Loomlurch, Will of the Feywild—if he is present—outlines his plan for rescuing Granny Nightshade’s child captives (see “Getaway Gang Raid”). Characters who have not earned Will’s assistance must devise their own plan for getting inside.

Where’s Skabatha?
All of Loomlurch’s denizens are aware of Granny Nightshade’s daily routine, which is as follows:

After waking from a long rest, she putters about in her garden (area L5) for 1d3 hours.
Most of her day is spent in the kitchen (area L13), with occasional visits to the study (area L14).
Before going to bed, the hag spends 1 hour conducting an inspection of the sewing room (area L9), the textile mill (area L12), and the workshop (area L4). After the inspection, Granny Nightshade moves to her bedroom (area L16), miniaturizes herself, and takes a long rest inside the dollhouse there.
Visitors can arrange a meeting with Skabatha by speaking to Chucklehead the goblin boss (in area L2) or Pincushion the living doll (in area L9). Any such meeting with the hag takes place in the parlor (area L3).

See appendix B for a description of Skabatha Nightshade and a summary of her rivalries with her sisters.

Bargaining with Skabatha
If you used the “Lost Things” adventure hook and the Story Tracker indicates that Skabatha has one or more things in her possession that the characters desire, Skabatha claims undisputable ownership of these lost things, asserting that she acquired them “fair and square.” Even so, she is willing to negotiate with characters who want to procure them. She is also inclined to strike bargains with characters who have other needs.

In exchange for one thing in her possession that a character has lost, Skabatha demands the characters complete one of the following quests:

Capture Will. Capture the brigand Will of the Feywild and bring him to Granny Nightshade alive. He’s sure to be hiding somewhere in the forest.

Find the Lost Horn. Bring her the unicorn horn that she says her sister Bavlorna recently lost. Maybe Prismeer’s native denizens can help the characters find it.

Spoil a Play. Sabotage a theatrical performance in Motherhorn, Endelyn Moongrave’s castle in Yon (see chapter 4). Skabatha would like nothing more than to see her sister bought down a peg or two. (To get to Yon, the characters will need a guide. Granny Nightshade expects them to know this fact and offers no help in finding a guide or seeing them safely to Yon.)

Skabatha is true to her word, returning one lost thing for each task completed while offering no assistance toward accomplishing the tasks. Skabatha used the lost things to fashion minor magic items, all of which she keeps in her dollhouse (area L16).

Skabatha’s Clockwork Key
The clockwork key embedded in Skabatha’s back rotates quickly when she’s in a good mood and slows down as her mood sours. When she is furious, the key comes to a dead stop. When the key stops turning, Skabatha attacks objects or creatures indiscriminately until something lifts her spirits and quells her rage, such as the defeat of an enemy or some other triumph, whereupon her key starts turning again. Whenever Skabatha loses her temper and turns violent, 1d3 redcaps sprout in her garden (see area L15 and “Skabatha’s Minions” below).

The key can’t be removed from Skabatha’s back while she lives, and it serves no function in the adventure other than to reflect her current mood.

Defeating Skabatha
In dire circumstances, Skabatha flees Loomlurch on her flying rocking horse mount (see area L6) and retreats to Motherhorn, the lair of her youngest sister, Endelyn (see chapter 4). If Bavlorna Blightstraw is in Loomlurch, she flees to Motherhorn as well.

If Skabatha is slain, a beetle emerges from her rotten flesh and whispers Endelyn Moongrave’s weakness to Skabatha’s killer: “Endelyn fears eclipses, not just real ones but symbolic ones as well. If you want to kill her, best do it during an eclipse, or her body will re-form.”

Skabatha’s Ring of Keys
If the characters defeat Skabatha or successfully pick her pocket, they can obtain a ring of three iron keys that she keeps on her person:

The first key locks and unlocks the doors leading from the garden (area L5) to the workshop (area L4) and the sewing room (area L9), and the door between areas L6 and areaL11.
The second key locks and unlocks the doors to the kitchen (area L13) and Mishka’s chains there.
The third key locks and unlocks the door to the cell in the kitchen (area L13).
Skabatha’s Minions
Granny Nightshade entrusts Loomlurch’s defense to various creatures, as described below. The hag’s minions, except for the redcaps, have orders to capture intruders alive and bring them before her.

Boggles
The despair of Loomlurch’s children has given rise to six boggles (see appendix C), three in area L4 and three in area L12. These cowardly creatures aren’t loyal to the hag, yet she tolerates them for the distress they cause the children.

Cradlefall

This green dragon wyrmling likes to hide in painted wooden boxes, of which there are three: one each in areas areaL3, areaL6, and areaL7. Each box is 3 feet on a side and has a hinged lid. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of conjuration magic around a box. A crank protruding from one side of the box attaches to a tiny metal music box mounted to the wooden box’s inside wall. Winding the crank causes the music box to play a 10-second tune reminiscent of a child’s lullaby. As the final note sounds, roll a d8. If the roll is 3 or lower and Cradlefall has not yet been defeated, the wyrmling bursts out like a jack-in-the-box, attacking creatures he considers his enemies. If the wyrmling has been dealt with, the lid springs open, but the box is empty.

While curled up in a box with the lid closed, Cradlefall can use an action to teleport himself and anything he is holding to another closed box in Loomlurch. When he is not hiding in a box, Cradlefall curls up in front of the oven in Granny Nightshade’s kitchen (area L13). Appendix D has additional roleplaying notes for Cradlefall.

Redcaps
Whenever Skabatha’s windup key runs down, her anger boils over, causing 1d3 murderous redcaps (see appendix C) to sprout in area L15. These redcaps are too hateful to serve as guards, so Skabatha sends them scuttling off into Thither to wreak havoc. Until she does so, the redcaps remain in area L15 and attack other creatures on sight.

Tin Soldiers
These ten automatons are fashioned to look like stout infantry soldiers, and they obey Skabatha without question. Six of them remain in the barracks (area L7), and the remaining four patrol the balconies outside areas areaL8 and L12. They charge forth to investigate any suspicious activity they see or hear, meaning that they are easily distracted. Each one is a Small (3-foot-tall) suit of animated armor with 27 (6d6 + 6) hit points.

Lost Children
Over the years, Skabatha’s minions have lured children from the Witchlight Carnival to Thither, allowing the hag to trap them in her workshop. Locked in an eternal battle with hardship, these unfortunates never grow old and have no hope of escape. The hag keeps the children safe and healthy, since to do otherwise would cause them to vanish (see “Children of Prismeer” in chapter 2). The hag’s minions likewise have strict orders not to physically harm the children.

Lost Children
Child	Location	Notes
Naal (11-year-old male drow)	areaL4	Stole the key to the kitchen door
Sung (9-year-old female human)	areaL4	—
Philomena (8-year-old female lightfoot halfling)	areaL4	Won’t leave Loomlurch without Oink the pig
Brottor (10-year-old male hill dwarf)	areaL8	Gravely ill after eating nightshade
Pud (12-year-old male human)	areaL8	Secretly loyal to Granny Nightshade
Wendel (11-year-old male strongheart halfling)	areaL9	—
Roff (10-year-old female bugbear)	areaL9	Stole a pouch of dust of corrosion
Yevelda (8-year-old female goblin)	areaL12	Knows a secret route into Granny Nightshade’s bedroom
Callybon (11-year-old female forest gnome)	areaL12	—
Pogo (9-year-old male forest gnome)	areaL12	—
Mishka (9-year-old female human)	areaL13	Chained to a worktable
The Lost Children table identifies the children currently held captive inside Loomlurch and their locations when the characters arrive. As time passes, the children can move about the lair, at your discretion. They stay clear of danger and play no role in combat. All of them are chaotic good.

Children free of Granny Nightshade’s tyranny have no easy way to return home, but they can take refuge at Little Oak’s treehouse or be left in the care of the unicorn Lamorna at Wayward Pool. The dwarf Elkhorn (see area L13) insists on remaining in Thither to care for the children if no one else will. If Zybilna is freed from her stasis, she returns the children to their proper homes.

Loomlurch Locations
The following descriptions are keyed to the map of Loomlurch.


LOOMLURCH
VIEW PLAYER VERSION
L1. Root Bridges
These two bridges have the same features. When the characters first approach one of them, read:

A gnarled bridge formed by tangled tree roots spans a rocky, dried-up riverbed.

The bridges sway and creak when crossed. To avoid making a racket, each creature traveling along a bridge must make a DC 12 Dexterity (Stealth) check. On a failed check, the creatures stationed in the goblin market (area L2) are alerted; they take no action immediately but can’t be surprised.

L2. Goblin Market
The characters can enter this area from the eastern root bridge or by traversing the adjoining woodland.

Three stalls selling candy are situated in this clearing, lit by windows carved into the giant fallen tree to one side of it. Two goblins are working in each stall, and the whole enterprise is watched closely by a goblin with a toffee apple head who appears to be muttering quietly to himself.


CHUCKLEHEAD
This market sells goblin-made candies of all sorts. Six goblins (lawful neutral) work here, two per stall, under the watchful gaze of their goblin boss, Chucklehead (neutral), whose head has been reshaped by fey magic to look like a toffee apple. The stallholders greet patrons warmly and invite them to sample and buy their delicious wares. Meanwhile, Chucklehead watches out for thieves.

Chucklehead. The goblin boss can escort characters to the parlor (area L3) if they request a meeting with Granny Nightshade. When left alone, he mutters to himself as though he’s having a constant but mild crisis of conscience. If the characters ask Chucklehead whom he’s muttering to, he says that a maggot crawled into his head and is slowly eating it from the inside out. He’s not sad about this turn of events because it has changed his outlook and disposition, making him kinder and more sympathetic to the plight of others. He claims he can speak to the maggot and it speaks to him, even though it actually doesn’t. The maggot in the goblin’s head will kill him in 30 days unless he receives the benefit of magic that cures a disease. That magic slays the maggot but also reverts Chucklehead’s alignment to neutral evil.

Chucklehead is protective of Mishka (see area L13) and wants to help her get away from Loomlurch, but he’s too scared of Granny Nightshade to free Mishka from the hag’s clutches. Appendix D has additional roleplaying notes for Chucklehead.

Merchant Stalls. The goods sold here are delicious but made with disgusting ingredients. Examples include beetles encased in hard candy, lollipops made from compacted ants, and jellied worms. The stallholders charge one trinket per treat. Roll a d8 and consult the Candy Treats table to determine what magical effect befalls a creature that eats one of these treats. Each effect lasts for 1 hour.

If a creature eats multiple treats and gets the same effect twice, extend the duration of the effect by 1 hour. A creature can have up to three different magical effects on it at any given time. If a creature eats a candy treat while it is already affected by three others, don’t roll on the table. Instead, the creature must make a DC 11 Constitution saving throw; on a failed save, the creature is poisoned for 8 hours.

Candy Treats
d8	Effect
1	Your footfalls emit musical notes that can be heard out to a range of 30 feet.
2	Eating the candy causes you to foam at the mouth, making it difficult (but not impossible) for you to speak.
3	Your fingers leave indelible stains on anything you touch.
4	Your head swells to twice its normal size.
5	You shrink, as though affected by the reduce effect of an enlarge/reduce spell.
6	Fireflies are drawn to you and form a persistent cloud around you, shedding bright light in a 5-foot radius and dim light for an additional 5 feet.
7	You grow, as though affected by the enlarge effect of an enlarge/reduce spell.
8	You are targeted by a polymorph spell and automatically fail the saving throw against it. The new form is a butterfly (use the bat stat block, but omit its darkvision, Echolocation trait, and Bite attack).
L3. Parlor
The door to area L4 is closed but not locked.

This chamber is nestled between walls of twisted roots, through gaps in which you can see the eerily beautiful woodland surrounding you. A closed wooden door stands opposite the root bridge that leads into this room, in the center of which are four armchairs encircling a small table laid out for a tea service. A painted wooden box three feet on a side rests in a corner. A crank protrudes from one side of it, causing it to resemble an oversized jack-in-the-box.

If Bavlorna Blightstraw retreated to Loomlurch after fleeing her home in chapter 2, her bobbing lily pad (see appendix A) lies on the floor next to the box, vaguely resembling a leaf-shaped carpet. Bavlorna herself can be found in area L14.

Three of the armchairs are trained mimics in disguise. They are magically compelled to remain in this room and adhere to creatures only when Granny Nightshade orders them to do so. The mimics are trained in nonlethal combat; characters reduced to 0 hit points by the mimics are stable rather than dying, giving the hag a chance to decide what to do with the unconscious victims.

Dragon-in-the-Box. The wooden box with the crank is one of the boxes where Cradlefall might be found (see “Skabatha’s Minions” earlier in the chapter).

Tea with Granny Nightshade. Characters who arrange a meeting with Granny Nightshade through Chucklehead (area L2) or Pincushion (area L9) are left here for a while before the hag shows up. When Granny Nightshade arrives, read:

The door creaks open, and a little old woman totters forward. She wears a grimy, old-fashioned shawl, and her skin looks like gnarled bark. A large iron key extends from her back, ticking rhythmically as it rotates.

“Sit down, children,” she says in a voice reminiscent of crunching leaves. “Let’s have some tea.”

Skabatha Nightshade (see appendix B) obeys the rule of hospitality (see “Rules of Conduct” in chapter 2) and presents herself as a kind host who is keen to know why the characters have paid her a visit. See “Bargaining with Skabatha” for guidance on running this conversation, during which she pours tea into filthy cups and stirs the liquid with a chicken bone, insisting that the characters drink up. On occasion, she reaches around with one of her arms and winds up her key. If the characters belittle or threaten her, Granny Nightshade orders her mimics to adhere to her guests and beat them unconscious while she watches with amusement.

Treasure. Characters who scour the parlor for treasure find the following items:

A spell scroll of speak with plants tucked in a side table drawer
A set of four silver teaspoons engraved with pained facial expressions (5 gp per spoon)
A bronze candlestick shaped like a bird’s leg (10 gp)
L4. Workshop
The doors to areas L3 and areaL7 are closed but not locked. The door to area L5 is locked, and Granny Nightshade has the only key (see “Skabatha’s Ring of Keys” earlier in the chapter).

Flickering lanterns illuminate a cluttered workshop filled with soft, ambient music produced by bells and chimes. Parts of toys are heaped on the tables—leering doll’s heads, half-built rocking horses, unpainted wooden balls, and the stuffed limbs of soft toys. A stove at the back of the room holds a saucepan of smelting metal. Three doors exit the workshop, and two storefront windows overlook the market outside.

The ambient music is a permanent magical effect that can’t be heard outside the workshop. If the characters enter quietly, add:

Three young children are gathered around a wooden worktable. The eldest, a drow boy, prances on the tabletop with a bar of soap in one hand, while a halfling girl and a human girl giggle at his audacity.

Granny Nightshade makes captured children craft nightmarish toys in this workshop. Three children are present when the characters arrive: Naal (an 11-year-old male drow), Sung (a 9-year-old female human), and Philomena (an 8-year-old female lightfoot halfling). They’ve been the hag’s prisoners for longer than any of them can remember and are wary of grown-ups. If the characters barge into the room, Philomena panics and runs to get help from the tin soldiers in area L7. All three children want to escape the hag’s clutches, although Philomena weeps if she’s forced to leave without her beloved piglet, Oink, who is kept in the pigpen (area L5).

Naal recently stole the kitchen key from Pincushion (see area L9) and took an impression of it using a bar of soap before fastening the key back onto Pincushion’s belt. When the characters arrive, Naal is recounting his heroic tale to the two girls. He wants to create a copy of the key and then sneak into the kitchen to steal milk. Naal gives characters the bar of soap if they give him something in return, such as fresh milk or some other tasty treat. (“It’s the rule of recip—… recip—… give-and-get,” he says.)

Boggles. Three boggles (see appendix C) lurk in the shadows, intending to play pranks on the visitors. Characters who spend a minute or so inside the workshop notice unsettling changes; dolls’ heads turn to face them when they’re not looking, balls bounce suddenly out of dark corners, or molten tin from the smelting pot splashes on the floor nearby. A character can use an action to try to detect hidden creatures, spotting all three boggles with a successful DC 16 Wisdom (Perception) check. If they are spotted, the boggles flee to the box in area L7 and turn its crank, hoping Cradlefall will pop out of the box and defend them. The boggles avoid combat themselves.

If Squirt is with the party, it encourages the characters to acquire as much boggle oil as they can. Only slippery boggle oil will do (see the “Boggle Oil” sidebar). Captured boggles provide the oil freely, hoping to earn their freedom.

Treasure. Characters who ransack the workshop uncover the following valuables:

A jar of iridescent glass eyes (10 gp)
A silver hammer and chisel in a green leather tool belt (15 gp for the set)
Iron metalworking tongs shaped like the jaws of a snapping dragon (15 gp)
BOGGLE OIL

A boggle excretes oil from its pores and can make the oil slippery or sticky. Squirt the oilcan needs slippery boggle oil to use its Boggle Oil action, and it can hold up to three applications of the oil. Boggle oil normally evaporates after 1 hour, but the oil is preserved indefinitely inside Squirt.

When a boggle creates a puddle of slippery oil on the ground, a character can scoop up 1d3 applications of the oil from the puddle (a process that takes 1 minute) before the oil disappears.

A friendly boggle will create three applications of boggle oil in exchange for a gift of equal perceived value, such as a trinket. An indifferent boggle expects a better gift for the same amount of oil, such as a bag of candy, a gemstone, or a magnifying glass. An unfriendly or hostile boggle won’t cooperate unless it is captured and forced to create oil to avoid punishment.

Window Displays. The following creepy toys are displayed in the workshop windows:

A set of nesting dolls in which each doll looks more frightened than the next larger one
A stuffed lion with needles for teeth and real bloodstains around its jaws
A toy windmill with a crank on one side that turns the vanes and the millstone
A set of playing cards depicting weeping children
A wind-up drunkard doll that totters a few paces and then falls over
Four finger puppets depicting an arguing family
A 1-foot-tall wooden guillotine
A tiny wooden box containing eight sticks of black chalk
L5. Granny Nightshade’s Garden
This outdoor garden extends almost the entire length of Loomlurch. The doors to areas L4 and L9 are locked, and Granny Nightshade has the only key that unlocks them (see “Skabatha’s Ring of Keys” earlier in the chapter). Three balconies overlooking the garden connect to areas areaL8, areaL9, and L12, respectively. The balcony outside area L9 is only 5 feet above the ground; the others are 20 feet high.

A woodland basin filled with plants and fungi stretches out along one side of the fallen tree. A pumpkin patch is at one end of the garden, next to a steaming compost heap, with ramshackle pens for pigs and goats at the opposite end. Bedraggled scarecrows hang from tall wooden stakes in the basin’s wooded slope. Two ground-level doors and three balconies provide entry to the hag’s lair.

Skabatha Nightshade (see appendix B) uses the garden to cultivate ingredients for her potions and candies. The hag spends a few hours here each day tending to her plants (see Where’s Skabatha? earlier in the chapter). Characters who won the game of hide-and-seek in the Witchlight Carnival’s Pixie Kingdom have advantage on any Dexterity (Stealth) checks made to hide in the garden.

Animal Pens. The pens contain seven goats, five adult pigs (use the boar stat block), and a Small piglet (noncombatant) named Oink, who is beloved by Philomena (see area L4).

Compost Heap. The compost heap is a shambling mound that remains motionless until it is disturbed or until it rises to attack. If the mound is motionless at the start of combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. Moreover, if a creature hasn’t observed the mound moving or acting, that creature must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check to discern that the mound is animate.

Granny Nightshade earlier took a cutting from the shambling mound’s root stem, binding it to her service. If a character uses a speak with plants spell to communicate with the shambling mound, it tells the character that the creature must obey the hag until its stolen root is returned to it. If a character promises to return the root to it, the shambling mound stops attacking and waits here for the characters to come back. If the root is brought back and given to it, the shambling mound goes on a rampage through the garden, destroying and devouring everything it can while leaving the characters and their allies unmolested, then shambles into the forest, never to return. The cutting can be found inside one of the cookbooks in area L13.

Mushrooms and Toadstools. Granny Nightshade grows many kinds of Feywild fungi, five of which have useful (and in some cases magical) properties. Roll 3d8 to determine how many of each mushroom can be harvested from this location. A character who examines a certain kind of mushroom can, with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Nature) check, ascertain its properties:

Butterfly Saddle. Each of these bright yellow toadstools has a ruffled, saddle-shaped cap properly sized for a pixie or sprite to sit on. They taste like butter and can be used as a substitute for that ingredient in recipes.

Eldercap. Eating one of these white and gray mushrooms causes the eater to look much older for 1 hour. This magical effect is an illusion that can be ended with a dispel magic spell.

Executioner’s Hood. Each of these mushrooms has a black, hood-shaped cap. Any creature that consumes an executioner’s hood must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or fall into a cataleptic state that is indistinguishable from death. This magical effect is identical to that of the feign death spell (including its duration).

Hummingbrella. A hummingbrella is a colorful mushroom with a frilly, parasol-shaped cap that drips sweet nectar and attracts hummingbirds. Eating one has the same effect as drinking antitoxin.

Pricklenoggin. Each of these mushrooms has short, prickly spines growing out of its red cap. Hats made from pricklenoggin caps are popular in the fey courts and considered very fashionable. Most tiny Fey would be grateful to receive one as a gift.


FEYWILD MUSHROOMS, FROM LEFT TO RIGHT:
BUTTERFLY SADDLE, ELDERCAP, EXECUTIONER’S HOOD, HUMMINGBRELLA, AND PRICKLENOGGIN
Plant Beds. Many plants grow in Granny Nightshade’s garden—licorice, sugarcane, marshmallow, and more. Characters who examine the plant beds discover a dark secret: each bed is nourished by the buried remains of a Humanoid. Mud-encrusted skulls protrude from the soil, with vegetation sprouting from their open jaws and eye sockets. As an action once per day, Granny Nightshade can raise eight skeletons from the earth, but she must be within 30 feet of the plant beds to use this power.

Pumpkin Patch and Staircase. Several large pumpkins grow in one spot amid thick, leafy vines. A wooden staircase on the edge of the pumpkin patch ascends to a 20-foot-high wooden balcony outside area L8.

If a creature other than Granny Nightshade or a Small Humanoid (such as a human child or a halfling) enters the pumpkin patch, three fat pumpkins burst open, and a giant poisonous snake slithers out of each of them. Granny Nightshade has cast an awaken spell on each of these snakes, giving it an Intelligence score of 10 and the ability to speak Common. Their names are Essaveth, Jahassi, and Sinius. They act as watchdogs, but they won’t climb stairs. If one of these snakes is wounded, it slithers into the pumpkin patch on its next turn, gaining total cover. On subsequent turns, it tries to hide and has advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks as long as the pumpkin patch provides cover.

Screaming Scarecrows. Five scarecrows are staked in a line near the pumpkin patch, and a detect magic spell reveals an aura of abjuration magic around each one. If an intruder moves within 50 feet of any of them, all five scarecrows scream loudly enough to alert everyone inside Loomlurch. Each scarecrow is a Medium object with AC 11, 5 hit points, vulnerability to fire damage, and immunity to poison and psychic damage.

L6. Rocking Horse
The door to area L11 is locked, and Granny Nightshade has the only key (see “Skabatha’s Ring of Keys” earlier in the chapter). If Skabatha has been forced to flee Loomlurch on her flying rocking horse, modify the following boxed text to remove all mention of the horse:

Creaking softly, a rocking horse moves back and forth near the door. Peeling paint covers its limbs, and its rocker is thick with moss. A rictus grin is painted on its face. Near a protruding root is a painted wooden box three feet on a side. A crank protrudes from one side of it, causing it to resemble an oversized jack-in-the-box.

The rocking horse is actually a flying rocking horse (see the accompanying stat block) that Granny Nightshade uses to soar across Prismeer. The horse is positioned so that it can attack trespassers who approach the door. Any character who gets within 5 feet of the rocking horse notices a depression on its forehead. Any character who succeeds on a DC 10 Intelligence check correctly intuits that a horn once protruded from this depression.

The rocking horse used to be a unicorn named Elidon until the hags of the Hourglass Coven turned it into an obedient Construct. If a character finds Elidon’s lost unicorn horn and places it on the rocking horse’s brow while the horse has at least 1 hit point remaining, the curse is broken and the rocking horse magically transforms into the unicorn Elidon, who appears at full health. Elidon is happy to repay the characters for their heroism but is equally eager to return to his mate, Lamorna (see “Wayward Pool” earlier in the chapter). Convincing him to join the party requires a successful DC 17 Charisma (Persuasion) check.

FLYING ROCKING HORSE
Medium Construct, Unaligned

Armor Class 15 (natural armor)

Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)

Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. (only while mounted; hover)

STR
10 (+0)
DEX
10 (+0)
CON
13 (+1)
INT
1 (–5)
WIS
3 (–4)
CHA
1 (–5)
Damage Immunities poison, psychic

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), passive Perception 6

Languages —

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2

False Appearance. If the rocking horse is motionless at the start of combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. Moreover, if a creature hasn’t observed the rocking horse move or act, that creature must succeed on a DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation) check to discern that the rocking horse is animate.

Flying Mount. The rocking horse can serve as a mount for a Medium or smaller creature and can fly only while mounted.

Unusual Nature. The rocking horse doesn’t require air, food, drink, or sleep, and it regains no hit points or Hit Dice at the end of a long rest.

Actions

Head Butt. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage.



Whether he stays with the party or not, Elidon intends to honor the rule of reciprocity (see “Rules of Conduct” in chapter 2) and offers to use his magic to aid the characters in the following ways before parting company with them:

He can use his Healing Touch action to treat a character’s wounds and remove any poisons or diseases afflicting that character.
Once a day, he can teleport himself and up to three willing party members to any location in Thither up to 1 mile away.
He can cast pass without trace on himself and the entire party at will. This spell requires Elidon’s concentration and lasts for up to 1 hour.
Dragon-in-the-Box. The wooden box with the crank is one of the boxes where Cradlefall might be found (see “Skabatha’s Minions” earlier in the chapter).

L7. Tin Soldier Barracks
Ten brightly painted structures resembling little wooden houses line the walls of this room. Each small house has a three-foot-high hinged door. Four of the doors are open, and the other six are closed.

A narrow staircase ascends the circular wall. Near the foot of the stairs is a painted wooden box three feet on a side. A crank protrudes from one side of it, causing it to resemble an oversized jack-in-the-box.

The staircase ends after 20 feet at a landing outside area L8.

Each small house is designed to hold one of Granny Nightshade’s tin soldiers. When the characters arrive, four soldiers are on patrol in areas L8 and L12, and the remaining six tin soldiers are inside their domiciles, behind closed doors. Each of these six Constructs is a Small (3-foot-tall) suit of animated armor with 27 (6d6 + 6) hit points.

The tin soldiers burst from their small houses and march forth if they hear combat in this room or an adjoining area, or if Skabatha or Pincushion calls for them. If the characters witness the soldiers emerge, read:

The beat of a drum erupts from out of the woodwork as all six small doors spring open at once. A troop of cask-shaped tin soldiers marches into view. A drum waddles behind one of them on stocky legs, striking itself with a pair of tiny drumstick arms.

The six tin soldiers operate as a unit and march to the beat of the drum, which is a Small animated object with AC 16, 25 hit points, a walking speed of 30 feet, blindsight out to a range of 30 feet, and no effective attacks. Its ability scores are Strength 6, Dexterity 14, Constitution 10, Intelligence 3, Wisdom 3, and Charisma 1. The drum can’t be blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, paralyzed, petrified, or poisoned, and it’s immune to poison and psychic damage. Its drumbeat can be heard out to a range of 60 feet. All tin soldiers that can hear the beating drum gain a +2 bonus to their damage rolls. If the drum is destroyed, every tin soldier within 60 feet of it is stunned until the end of its next turn.

Dragon-in-the-Box. The wooden box with the crank is one of the boxes where Cradlefall might be found (see “Skabatha’s Minions” earlier in the chapter).


MARCH OF THE TIN SOLDIERS
L8. Workhouse Dormitory
Two 3-foot-tall tin soldiers patrol the balcony outside this room. Each tin soldier is a Small suit of animated armor with 27 (6d6 + 6) hit points. The doors leading to this room are closed but unlocked.

This dormitory nestles in the tree boughs and has round windows overlooking a wooden balcony. Lining the walls are ten child-sized bunks outfitted with patchwork quilts and straw-stuffed pillows.

A young male dwarf lies in one of the bunks, coughing and drenched in sweat, while an older lad mops his brow with water from a bucket. Two doors exit the room: one leads to a balcony, the other deeper into the tree.

Granny Nightshade’s workers sleep in these bunks. When the characters arrive, two children are present: Brottor (a 10-year-old male hill dwarf) and Pud (a 12-year-old male human). Brottor is poisoned; he fell gravely ill after eating nightshade from the garden. Pud has been assigned to care for him until the malady passes or Brottor dies.

Pud hisses for the characters to be quiet, nodding toward the soldiers on the balcony. If the characters comply, Pud quietly describes Granny Nightshade’s routine and all of her minions (see Where’s Skabatha? and “Skabatha’s Minions” earlier in the chapter). Characters who are suspicious of Pud can make a DC 12 Wisdom (Insight) check; on a successful check, a character discerns that Pud is untrustworthy. (In fact, he’s deciding whether to betray the characters to the hag.) If one or more characters are mean to him, Pud slips off at the first opportunity to alert Skabatha, hoping that his loyalty to her will pay off for him in the future.

Curing Brottor. Any effect that neutralizes poison can cure Brottor. If the characters lack the means to cure Brottor on their own, they can use hummingbrella mushrooms (found in areas areaL5 and L13) to neutralize the poison.

If his ailment remains untreated, the dwarf falls into a coma after 5 hours. A character who administers to the dwarf for 1 hour and succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check can delay the onset of the coma for an additional 1d4 + 1 hours.

If the characters save Brottor’s life, Pud silently vows not to betray them to the hag.

Treasure. Characters who search the dormitory uncover the following valuable items:

A silver bookmark shaped like a feather (5 gp)
A gold signet ring depicting a weeping willow (25 gp)
A cracked bloodstone (25 gp) stuffed inside a pillowcase
L9. Sewing Room
A closed, unlocked door connects this room to a 5-foot-high wooden balcony that overlooks Granny Nightshade’s garden (area L5).

“Dunderhead!” cries a scratchy voice as you enter this cluttered chamber. “Those tatty sleeves wouldn’t serve as socks for a chicken. Start again!”

A plump halfling boy and a young, fluffy bugbear sit at work benches, watched over by a living, child-sized doll with buttons for eyes. An animated carpet prances around the children, who pay it no attention. The sewing room contains rolls of fabric, bobbins of thread, knitting needles, and pincushions.

Materials for the workshop are sewn here under the watchful gaze of Pincushion, a living doll (see appendix C for its stat block). The prancing carpet is a rug of smothering that defends Pincushion and keeps strangers away from the children. Pincushion carries a key that locks and unlocks the doors to the kitchen (area L13). The key dangles from a hoop attached to its waist.

The living doll challenges intruders and demands to know why they’re trespassing here. To satisfy it, a character must succeed on a DC 10 Charisma (Deception) check. On a failed check, Pincushion hollers for the tin soldiers at area L7. If satisfied, Pincushion asks the characters to wait here while it hurries to notify Skabatha of the newcomers’ presence. The rug stays behind to make sure the children don’t leave. Appendix D has additional roleplaying notes for Pincushion.

Children. Two children are working here when the characters arrive: Wendel (an 11-year-old male strongheart halfling) and Roff (a 10-year-old female bugbear). Roff recently stole a pouch of dust of corrosion (see appendix A) from the store cupboard in area L10. She conceals the pouch in her clothing and offers it to her saviors if rescued from the tyranny of Pincushion and the rug.

Treasure. Once the living doll leaves or is defeated, the characters can search the sewing room for treasure, finding the following valuable items:

A spool of barbed, golden yarn (15 gp)
Three bolts of silk in shades of putrid green and cesspit brown (10 gp each)
A set of five painted thimbles depicting poisonous Feywild plants (25 gp for the set)
L10. Cupboards
The doors in this chamber are closed but not locked. When the characters enter for the first time, read:

Moths cluster around a lantern that hangs from the ceiling in the middle of a hallway, casting flitting shadows on the walls. The hall contains three sliding doors along the walls, and a heavier hinged door stands at the opposite end.

The three cupboards, accessed by sliding the doors open, hold workshop supplies, boxes of junk, and other mundane bric-a-brac. If one or more characters spend at least 15 minutes searching a cupboard, they find 1d4 trinkets inside it (each one determined by rolling on the Feywild Trinkets table in the introduction).

Large Cupboard. If the characters didn’t dispose of her in chapter 1, Sowpig stands in the middle of the largest cupboard, silent and unmoving. She is a Small ghoul with 17 (5d6) hit points. Moths that live in the cupboard have encased Sowpig’s body in silk. Opening the cupboard door releases a swarm of moths, which is harmless and always moves toward the nearest light source. Any space that it occupies is lightly obscured.

After the swarm has been released, Sowpig emerges from her silk cocoon to ask why she has been disturbed. The ghoul assumes that the characters are Granny Nightshade’s workers, sent to fetch her for a new task. She has no interest in the day-to-day affairs of Loomlurch and attacks the characters only if they threaten Granny Nightshade in the ghoul’s presence or seem particularly suspicious. Sowpig follows them through the lair and shares an occasional joke, which is always dark and upsetting. Appendix D has additional roleplaying notes for Sowpig.

Unicorn Horn. If the Story Tracker indicates that the unicorn horn is here, characters can find it in Sowpig’s cupboard, buried in a box full of junk.

L11. Family Tree
The door to L10 is closed but not locked, and the doors to areas L6 and L13 are both locked. Granny Nightshade carries keys to both of these doors (see “Skabatha’s Ring of Keys” earlier in the chapter), and Pincushion (see area L9) has a spare key to area L13. The staircase in this room climbs 20 feet to a landing that ends outside area L12.

This room has three doors and a wood-carved staircase that ascends to a higher level. The walls are a dense tangle of tree roots and brambles, nestled among which are five animated portraits: one of a svelte, dark-haired woman and the others depicting hags.

When the characters arrive, the portraits show images of Granny Nightshade and her family, with no labels to identify them:

A truly ancient and terrifying hag (Baba Yaga, the Mother of Witches)
A toadish hag (Bavlorna Blightstraw, as depicted in appendix B)
A skeletal hag wearing a black, theatrical contraption resembling a dress (Endelyn Moongrave, as depicted in appendix B)
A hag with a wind-up key in her back, one empty eye socket, and a wooden eye held in her hand (Skabatha Nightshade, as depicted in appendix B)
A svelte, dark-haired woman with a commanding presence (her appearance matching that of the Tasha mannequin outside the Hall of Illusions in the Witchlight Carnival, as described in chapter 1)
The portraits are enchanted to display the last creature that pricked its skin on the brambles’ thorns in addition to its four closest family members, if it has any. These family members can be living or dead. (If the creature has fewer than four close family members, any remaining portraits are blank.) Each portrait magically animates to create the impression that the subject is looking around and shifting uncomfortably, but the animation has the quality of an old movie. The moving images are silent.


MAGICAL PORTRAIT OF TASHA
Pricking Thorns. Any creature that reaches toward a portrait must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or be pricked by the thorny brambles. The prick deals no damage, but the portraits change to match the pricked creature and up to four of its closest family members.

L12. Textile Mill
Two 3-foot-tall tin soldiers patrol the balcony outside this room, guarding against outside intruders. Each one is a Small suit of animated armor with 27 (6d6 + 6) hit points. Both doors to this room are closed but not locked. The tin soldiers open the door and enter the room if they hear any commotion within.

Three large, freestanding looms dominate this chamber. A young goblin and a pair of gnome children work the machines, filling the room with a loud, rhythmic clatter. A door is set in the opposite wall, and an archway to the east leads to a storeroom.

Each night, Skabatha Nightshade (see appendix B) visits the textile mill to check up on her workers (see Where’s Skabatha? earlier in the chapter). The looms are used to weave fabric for the sewing room and the workshop. They are large, treadle-driven machines that generate a considerable racket. The storeroom contains spools of yarn.

Boggles. Three boggles (see appendix C) play tricks on the child workers when no one else is around. The boggles are hidden in the corners of the room when the characters arrive, though the children shoot fearful glances at the boggles in the hope that the characters will notice what’s going on. A character can use an action to try to spot the hidden boggles, doing so with a successful DC 16 Wisdom (Perception) check. Because of the children’s fearful glances, the characters have advantage on this check. The boggles avoid combat, surrendering if they face certain harm.

If Squirt is with the party, it encourages the characters to acquire as much slippery boggle oil as they can (see the “Boggle Oil” sidebar earlier in the chapter). Captured boggles provide the oil freely, hoping to earn their freedom.

Children. Three children are working here when the characters arrive: Yevelda (an 8-year-old female goblin), Callybon (an 11-year-old female forest gnome), and her brother, Pogo (a 9-year-old male forest gnome). The children are eager to escape Loomlurch but won’t converse with strangers until the area is cleared of boggles.

If the characters ask the children for help navigating the hag’s lair, Yevelda reveals that she knows a secret route into Skabatha’s bedroom (area L16). To take that route, a character must climb out of the storeroom window, clamber across branches that grow out of the upright trees and pass above area L13, and then hop onto the windowsill of the hag’s bedroom. To reach the windowsill, a character must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. On a failed check, the character falls 20 feet onto the roof of area L13, taking 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage.

On one of her forays into the hag’s private quarters, Yevelda witnessed Pud (see area L8) reporting to the hag. She hasn’t told anyone about this yet and is unwilling to share her knowledge about the secret route to area L16 while Pud is present.

Treasure. Searching the storeroom reveals the following items of value:

A gold bodkin (2 gp)
A pouch holding 35 sp (the coins’ mintage is unfamiliar to the characters)
A small, leather-bound book containing delicate sketches and watercolor paintings of pixies, sprites, and other Fey (50 gp)
L13. Granny Nightshade’s Kitchen
The door to L14 is ajar, and the doors to areas L11 and L15 are locked. Granny Nightshade carries a key that locks and unlocks all three doors (see “Skabatha’s Ring of Keys” earlier in the chapter), as does Pincushion (see area L9).

This squalid kitchen is carved out of the trunk of the fallen oak. A large clay oven sits in the middle of the room, surrounded by crowded shelves laden with forest fungi, jars of pickled grubs, animal skulls, and moldy cookbooks. Sickly-sweet vapors emerge from a cauldron that rests atop the oven.

A young human girl shackled to a worktable is hard at work peeling potatoes. Set into the floor nearby is a padlocked iron grate through which you hear a gruff male voice say, “Are those potatoes I smell?”

Cradlefall, the green dragon wyrmling, spends much of his time dozing in here by the oven. If the characters have not encountered the wyrmling elsewhere, read:

A green dragon the size of a large dog is coiled up near the oven, apparently dozing. Fumes rise from the wyrmling’s nostrils.

Each afternoon, Skabatha Nightshade (see appendix B) spends most of her time in this room with occasional visits to the study (area L14). She uses the kitchen to boil candy and prepare potions. The hag treats Cradlefall like her beloved pet; if Skabatha is not present, the wyrmling flees to her side and reports that intruders are in the kitchen.

Child Worker. Mishka (a 9-year-old female human) serves Granny Nightshade as a scullery maid. Mishka has managed to escape from Loomlurch twice, only to be tracked down by Cradlefall and recaptured both times; that’s why Granny Nightshade now chains her to the worktable. As an action, a character using thieves’ tools can pick the lock on Mishka’s ankle cuff with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check. Any key that unlocks the kitchen doors also unlocks Mishka’s chains.

If Skabatha isn’t present, Mishka tells the characters about the hag’s daily routine and describes Granny Nightshade’s minions (see Where’s Skabatha? and “Skabatha’s Minions” earlier in the chapter). She suggests that they lure Granny Nightshade into the oven and burn her up.

Oven. This oven is large enough to cook a Medium creature whole. A 5-foot-wide iron door in the front of the oven allows one to reach into the oven’s interior without disturbing the fuming cauldron that rests atop it. The oven’s flames are produced by a fire elemental that is bound inside the clay enclosure. Its coal-black eyes are visible inside the flames to anyone who peers inside the oven. While it is trapped in this manner, the elemental can’t be targeted or harmed directly.

Any creature that enters the hot oven or starts its turn inside it takes 10 (2d6 + 3) fire damage. A character can try to shove a Medium or smaller creature into the oven, if the creature is within 5 feet of the oven’s open door (see “Shoving a Creature” in the Player’s Handbook). If the creature is looking into the oven when it is shoved, the Strength (Athletics) check to shove the creature is made with advantage.

The oven is a Large object with AC 13, 30 hit points, vulnerability to cold damage, and immunity to fire, poison, and psychic damage. If the oven is reduced to 15 hit points or fewer, the elemental escapes from captivity and occupies an open space next to the oven. The elemental waits in the kitchen for Granny Nightshade to appear, then attacks her. It attacks the characters only if they harm it.

Trapdoor and Cell. A 3-foot-square, padlocked iron grate covers a 5-foot-deep, 5-foot-wide cell built into the kitchen floor. The walls of the cell are made of 1-foot-thick clay bricks held together with mortar. Granny Nightshade carries the padlock’s only key (see “Skabatha’s Ring of Keys” earlier in the chapter). As an action, a character can use thieves’ tools to try to pick the lock, doing so with a successful DC 18 Dexterity check. As an action, a character can try to pull open the trapdoor without removing the padlock, doing so with a successful DC 22 Strength (Athletics) check.

Skabatha imprisons her most hated enemies inside the cell, which is filled with muddy water to a depth of 3 feet. The cell currently holds a bedraggled and grumpy dwarf named Elkhorn (see appendix B), one of the members of the adventuring band known as Valor’s Call. If Rubin Sugarwood was lured through the mirror in the Witchlight Carnival’s Hall of Illusions, the characters also find him in the cell, still wearing smeared butterfly face paint. Rubin angered the hag, and she has promised to “plant him in her garden” when she has a new plot of ground ready.

If Elkhorn is freed, he provides the following information to his rescuers:

Elkhorn and his four human companions entered Prismeer to confront their archenemy, the League of Malevolence. Elkhorn’s companions included Strongheart the paladin, Mercion the cleric, Molliver the rogue, and Ringlerun the wizard. Their group is known as Valor’s Call.
The League of Malevolence is a coalition of villains: Kelek the sorcerer, Warduke the helmed swordsman, Skylla the warlock, a priest of Orcus named Zargash, and Zarak the assassin. Valor’s Call caught up with the League of Malevolence in the Palace of Heart’s Desire, home of the archfey Zybilna. The two groups fought a mighty battle, during which Elkhorn believes he was knocked out. He woke up here, in Loomlurch.
Granny Nightshade has lost interest in Elkhorn and is not concerned if he starves to death. The children toss him scraps of food to keep him alive.
Elkhorn happily joins the characters if he is freed from the cell. He’s wearing his armor, and his shield and sword are stuffed in a kitchen cupboard (see “Treasure” below), though he doesn’t know that. The old dwarf is determined to free the children of Loomlurch from captivity and ensure their safekeeping until they can be returned to their families. His duty in this regard overpowers even his longing to find out what happened to his adventuring companions; if the children are rescued, Elkhorn rounds them up and cares for them.

When Elkhorn and his friends first arrived in Prismeer, they traveled to the Palace of Heart’s Desire by following the stone causeway that once stretched from the palace to the edge of the domain. This route has since been shattered. He knows of no other way to reach the palace.

Cauldron. The cauldron is nearly full of hot melted candy, which bubbles gently. As an action, a creature can spill the cauldron’s contents onto another creature within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw or take 2 (1d4) fire damage; in addition, the creature is covered with a sticky, crunchy candy coating that is easily washed off with water.

Cookbooks. Granny Nightshade has several cookbooks in her kitchen that contain candy recipes. One of these books has a 1-foot-long piece of gnarled root as a bookmark; this object is the cutting that Granny Nightshade took from the shambling mound in area L5.

Characters can also find a cookbook that contains formulas for common and uncommon potions. A character can brew such a potion by following the rules for crafting magic items in the Dungeon Master’s Guide.

Treasure. Searching Granny Nightshade’s kitchen reveals the following treasures:

Six brass egg cups embossed with the faces of crying children (5 gp each)
An ornate eight-minute hourglass (75 gp)
A moldy wooden coffer labeled “Mushrooms” (in Elvish) that contains two butterfly saddles and a hummingbrella (see area L5 for descriptions of these mushrooms)
In addition, Elkhorn’s shield and +1 longsword can be found inside a small cupboard.

L14. Study
The door to area L13 is ajar. The staircase in this room climbs 20 feet to area L16.

A staircase runs along the wall of this circular room and climbs to an upper level. Tucked behind curtains of moss and ivy are numerous bookshelves bearing ancient tomes, and built into one of the bookcases is a tall oval mirror in a wooden frame. Flickering candlelight emanates from the eye sockets of a human skull resting on an open rolltop desk.

Skabatha Nightshade spends part of her day here (see Where’s Skabatha? earlier in the chapter); if present, she is seated at the writing desk and scribbling notes to herself while cursing various “unappreciative” child workers under her breath. If Bavlorna Blightstraw fled Downfall in chapter 2, she is slumped against the wall under the stairs and consumed with self-pity. She’s in no mood to fight or have a conversation, so she mumbles and curses to herself, attacking only in self-defense. Both hags’ stat blocks appear in appendix B.

The shelves contain books of Feywild lore, all written in Elvish, each of which has a withered frog’s body stitched into its spine. Kissing the frog or stroking it with a moistened finger causes the frog to croak the book’s title in Elvish. Notable tomes include the following:

All Things Sticky, Slippery, and Sweet, written for children, illustrates and describes substances that would fascinate them, such as boggle oil, troll spittle, and various flavors of tree sap.

Fantasma Demento’s Codicil of Conundrums is a lavishly illustrated book of fey puzzles and riddles. Answers to the puzzles and riddles are written in invisible ink.

gobliN eht fo hguaL tsaL is a thin, illustrated book describing nilbogs, who are capricious fey spirits that possess goblins, foment chaos in goblinoid society, and use their magic to drive others to do the opposite of what they desire. All the book’s writing is backward.

Pity He’s an Elf is a collection of illustrated short stories about an elf adventurer named Aethyn Ourglas, who travels the Feywild and befriends dangerous creatures in surprising ways.

The Queen’s Gowns depicts and describes famous gowns worn by the Summer Queen, with asides written by the gowns’ equally famous designers.

Tales from the Gloaming Court is a set of eleven hefty, green-covered, illustrated books filled with stories and illustrations of Feywild intrigue that shed light on the Seelie and Unseelie courts. (Volumes 3 and 8 are missing from Skabatha’s collection and can be found in chapter 4.)

Three Rules to Rule By is a thin, dog-eared book that describes the rules of hospitality, ownership, and reciprocity in detail (see “Rules of Conduct” in chapter 2).

Twilight Tides is a fat, wrinkled book about navigating the oceans of the Feywild.

After two books were stolen from her collection (volumes 3 and 8 of Tales from the Gloaming Court), Skabatha placed wards on every one of the remaining books. Any book that is removed from her study turns to ashes instantly. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of abjuration magic around each book.

Shelved among the books are hundreds of scrolls that bear no magical wards; they describe encounters with individuals who struck bargains with Skabatha, and the horrible curses she put on each of them for failing to uphold their end.

Magic Mirror. The oval mirror built into one of the bookcases functions like the magic mirror in area B1 of Bavlorna’s cottage (see chapter 2).

Rolltop Desk. This desk contains quills, ink, a human skull fashioned into a lantern, a treasure (see “Treasure” below), and a rolled-up wanted poster bearing a sketch of Will of the Feywild, along with the following text in Common:

Wanted: Will of the Feywild!

Find this flibbertigibbet and deliver him to me alive and unharmed, and I shall make you as strong as an octopus!

Granny Nightshade

Any character who can rightfully claim this reward is better off not doing so, for it comes in the form of a potion that, if drunk, gives the imbiber a Strength score of 4 (the strength of a normal octopus). The effect lasts until the creature receives the benefit of a remove curse spell, a greater restoration spell, or similar magic.

Treasure. Among the junk in the rolltop desk are the following interesting items:

A varnished human eyeball inside the lower half of a small hourglass that hangs like a pendant from a necklace made of woven hair. This is the Hourglass Coven’s hag eye (described in the “Hag Covens” sidebar in the Monster Manual).
A black-feathered quill with a bone tip that magically produces its own ink (150 gp). The ink is the crimson color of fresh blood until it dries, whereupon its color changes to sepia.
A Tiny clockwork toad with AC 5 and 1 hit point. If a creature places the toad on the ground, it hops 5 feet across the ground on each of the creature’s turns in a random direction and makes a croaking noise that can be heard out to a range of 30 feet. Any creature that licks the clockwork toad must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1 hour. While the creature is poisoned in this way, other creatures are invisible to it.
L15. Redcap Patch
To one side of the giant, toppled tree is a grove of bearded willows on the bank of a murky woodland pond. A patch of tilled earth spreads beneath their boughs. The caps of several red toadstools are just beginning to emerge from the loam.

The toadstools are the tips of the hats worn by six redcaps (see appendix C) that are forming under the earth. Any creature that tries to pick a toadstool causes its redcap to rise up out of the earth, outraged at being awakened early. This redcap is not fully formed and has half its normal hit points.

Whenever Granny Nightshade’s key stops turning, 1d3 redcaps emerge fully grown from this patch, leaving any remaining redcaps under the soil, still not fully formed. The risen redcaps loiter here until they see something they can kill or until Granny Nightshade gives them a mission.

The redcaps are hostile toward creatures other than Granny Nightshade. However, if a redcap is offered a gift, it accepts the gift and becomes so angry at the thought of having to reciprocate (see “Rules of Conduct” in chapter 2) that it clutches its chest and keels over dead at the start of its next turn.

L16. Granny Nightshade’s Bedroom
This room has two closed doors, one leading to a 20-foot-high balcony and the other leading to area L17. Neither door is locked. A staircase descends to area L14.

Almost everything about this bedroom is orderly, from the bed with the patchwork quilt to the ornamental pigs arranged in a neat row on the dresser. Such tidiness is at odds, however, with the decaying dollhouse sitting on the bedside table. This three-foot-tall edifice has seen better days and is now besmirched by peeling paint, mold, and rot.

Behind the dollhouse, by the window, moths flutter inside a large bell jar. Facing one another along the outer wall are a pair of doors. Next to the door closest to the staircase is a wooden rocking cradle with a neatly folded blanket in it.

If Skabatha Nightshade (see appendix B) is here, she is asleep inside the dollhouse in her miniaturized form. While Granny Nightshade is sleeping, a character must succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity (Stealth) check to sneak up on her without waking her. Talking near the dollhouse also awakens her.

The dollhouse is fully enclosed, rather than being open at the back as a normal dollhouse would be. A Tiny creature can enter the dollhouse through its front door or one of its windows and explore its interior, which has a gloomy foyer, parlor, kitchen, and dining room on the ground floor; two bedrooms, a sewing room, and a nonfunctional bath on the second floor; and a spooky, spacious attic. If you used the “Lost Things” adventure hook and Granny Nightshade stole from the characters, any items that their lost things were transformed into are kept inside the dollhouse’s attic, along with the items listed in the “Treasure” section below.

Characters who inspect the outside of the dollhouse closely can see that the roof is hinged, like the lid of a toybox. It is held shut by an arcane lock spell that only Granny Nightshade can bypass without using magic. No amount of brute force will open the sealed roof, but a knock spell or similar magic opens it, granting access to the attic and its contents. Granny Nightshade also set a password (“rumpleclump”) that, when spoken within 5 feet of the dollhouse, suppresses the arcane lock spell for 1 minute. Cradlefall and Pincushion know the password but won’t divulge it unless their very existence is threatened. Mishka (see area L13) also knows the password and shares it with any characters who are willing to help her.

Creatures inside the dollhouse can’t be affected by spells or attacks that originate outside the dollhouse, and the dollhouse is enchanted to be immune to all damage. If it is knocked over, each creature inside the dollhouse must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 1d6 bludgeoning damage from colliding with walls, furniture, and junk.

Jar of Moths. Granny Nightshade keeps these moths to ameliorate the effect of her curse: after she wakes each morning, she forgets all about the first creature she sees. This means that Granny Nightshade doesn’t think about the creature, doesn’t see it in front of her, and instantly forgets anything it says. The effect lasts until she finishes her next long rest or until she takes damage from the creature, at which point she remembers everything. So, to lessen the risk to herself, Granny Nightshade placed the jar of moths where it would be the first thing she sees when she emerges from her dollhouse each morning.

Rocking Cradle. This cradle is painted with images of green dragons. It belongs to Cradlefall, though the wyrmling has outgrown it. It contains a folded, threadbare blanket.

Treasure. The attic of the dollhouse contains the following valuable items:

A pair of embroidered velvet slippers (15 gp)
A false eye made of solid gold (25 gp)
A cracked hand mirror with a gaudy, bejeweled handle and frame (65 gp)

SKABATHA’S DOLLHOUSE
L17. Aviary
The door to area L16 is closed but not locked.

Old, empty birdhouses are nailed to the walls of this cramped room, and a dozen birdcages hang from the ceiling. The cages are filled with tiny clockwork sparrows. As the birds’ gears turn, the air thrums with rhythmic ticking. Paper and quills are heaped on a small writing desk under the cages. A pair of open windows overlook the forest beyond. Carved into the wall above one window is the word “Hither,” and above the other is the word “Yon.”

Granny Nightshade uses the mechanical sparrows to relay messages to her sisters. The sparrows use the hawk stat block but are Constructs that are immune to poison and psychic damage; the effects of exhaustion; and the charmed, frightened, petrified, and poisoned conditions.

The sparrows have their names engraved on their breasts. (Example names include Glyff, Pim, and Zwee. Create others as needed.) If a creature speaks a sparrow’s name aloud and gives it a task, it flies off as though affected by an animal messenger spell. In addition to delivering spoken messages, a mechanical sparrow can also carry written letters.

Writing Desk. The writing desk contains three letters, two from Bavlorna and one from Endelyn:

Sister,

I don’t have Elidon’s horn. If I did, I would use it to free Bloodybeak and send it after the jabberwock that lairs in the palace and hunts in your forest. No matter what Endelyn says, that burbling beast of a dragon is a threat to our coven and our three realms. How Zybilna managed to befriend it, I’ll never know! Maybe we should ask her—ha ha.

Much love,
Lorna

Lovely Skab,

The last time I saw the unicorn horn, it was in your possession. Pity you lost it. But fret not! I have gazed into the Orrery of Tragedies, and it has revealed to me that Elidon’s horn will be found.

If worse comes to worst, recall that Elidon’s mate still dwells in your forest. You could kill Lamorna and take her horn—assuming, of course, you’re not too busy making toys.

Your darling sister,
End

Dear Sister,

There’s no use asking Endelyn if she has the horn. She doesn’t tell us anything! But if we don’t find it soon, I fear what the jabberwock will do after it gets tired of prowling the forest and turns its fiery gaze elsewhere. Gods’ bodkins, that thing gives me nightmares!

Must I remind you that we need a unicorn’s horn to free creatures from the cauldron’s time-freezing magic? It’s not enough to know their true names, you know. Of course, my greater concern is that someone else finds the horn and uses it for exactly that purpose. What do you think Zybilna will do to us, we treacherous three, if she’s no longer bound by her cauldron’s magic?

Your beloved sister,
Lorna

