THE MOATHOUSE
Now a ruined keep of small size, the moathouse has an exciting history of battles and monsters. It lies approximately ten miles east of Hommlet, on the road toward the deserted town of Nulb. An overgrown and rugged two miles long path leads off the main road to the moathouse.

MOATHOUSE HISTORY
When the Temple of Elemental Evil was built, this keep arose at the point where their evil influence reached the farthest west. It was a great deal of work because the area was wet and unstable. The builders had to drain the surrounding lands and dig down to the limestone to build a foundation (once they did, they allowed the water to return, channeling it into a moat around the fortress). The construction crews complained and whined, "Why here?"

The reason is that this fortress is over the site of an ancient shrine to Tharizdun. In time-lost days, clerics of the Dark God erected a great obelisk within a natural cave to commune with their deity. Then, when Tharizdun was imprisoned, they sealed the cave and diverted a minor underground stream so that even if the top of the shaft leading down to the cave were discovered, it would appear to be a pool.

The original master of the place was a cultist of the Dark God named Noustan. As a cleric of Zuggtmoy, he compelled the forces of Elemental Evil to build here. The moathouse served its purpose, but each time the forces of good struggled against Elemental Evil, this outpost was the last to fall. The first time, when the moathouse was still new, a pitched battle between two sizable forces tore gaping holes in the walls, destroying the mostly wooden sections of the main structure, and the place was looted. The second time, as the temple was rebuilding itself, a particularly devious and vile cleric named Lareth deBeautiful took control of the moathouse. Lareth commanded a small number of troops, primarily humans and bugbears, who occupied only the dungeon of the moathouse. Shrewd and opportunistic, Lareth professed to serve both Lloth and Zuggtmoy at various times but was actually a cleric ofTharizdun. He and his servants were slain by the small band of heroes who helped defeat the temple with the aid of locals such as Y'dey and Elmo (see Chapter 1: The Town of Hommlet).

Since then, the moathouse has fallen even worse, and the dungeon has been relatively quiet except for the ghouls and ghasts. Unfortunately, these horrors are always present, no matter how many are destroyed (due to the influence of Tharizdun's shrine, but no one knows that). Occasionally Elmo comes out to the place just to make sure 1 is quiet, and Spugnoir (see area 25 in Chapter 1) sometimes explores a
few rooms in the dungeon, looking for a magical treasure rumored to belong to Lareth. Over the years, even a few groups of adventurers have stopped by, but they consistently report what everyone else does-nothing new stirs in the moathouse. Until now.

Delian, or "ol' Del" as he refers to himself, wanders the wilderness alone, trapping small animals for food and occasionally going to Hommlet to sell the pelts. The PCs encounter him on his way to town on the road or checking his traps in the wilderness. He's a friendly old guy, grizzled and dirty, usually with a bag full of pelts or dead animals on his shoulder. He doesn't get to talk to people much, so he's willing to chat.
If the PCs say anything about the moathouse, Del responds, "There's a dragon in there! Don't wanna be going there."
Del saw Utreshimon, a blue dragon, about three days ago (the dragon took up residence in the moathouse the previous week). He has no idea if the dragon has anything to do with the clerics he saw - and it doesn't.

If pressed for more information about the moathouse other than the dragon, he says: "Some folks been pokin' in and outta that old place. Look like holy men to me, except they keep strange company."
What Del saw was the clerics ofTharizdun who had been
exploring and excavating the site for the past three months. The "strange company" are gnolls, which Del can identify because enough live in the area for him to be familiar with such creatures. Careful questioning reveals that the gnolls with the clerics were "more like people" than most. (Their armor, weapons, and clothing are in good shape and relatively uniform, having been supplied by the clerics.)

Pressed even further, Del says: "Even before, when that place was quieter, I wouldn't go in there. It's haunted."
What Del saw were the ghouls that infest the moathouse. He doesn't know a ghoul from a zombie from a wight, but he can describe them as"like dead people still walkin' around."

The Dragon
Utreshimon, a young blue dragon, found the moathouse
about a week ago and moved in. Although a young blue is a Should the PCs decide to leave the road and explore their
tough challenge for a low-level party, a few factors make the
encounter less deadly. For one, the dragon's actions are hilly, rocky scrub, with the occasional moor in the damp low-
limited because of the clerics and others in the dungeon lands between hills. A chance for hostile encounters exists
below. It seems Utreshimon has them trapped, and he finds
this dangerous area. Use the table below, checking once every 6 hours. The encounter level (EL) listed is the average
that funny. She's also not terribly hungry, having already devoured a cleric.
The Clerics
It's been two months or more now since clerics of the Elder
Elemental Eye, the doom-dreamer cult's more presentable
delegates, moved secretly into the area around Hommlet.
Although the cult's plans require using the Temple of Ele-
mental Evil eventually, they concentrate
on uncovering what their records show as an important old temple toTharizdun under the moathouse.
Their operation here is almost finished. They've thoroughly explored the obelisk chamber (see area 32) and gathered relics they believe necessary.
When the dragon arrived, the clerics attempted to destroy him. That mistake cost them dearly. Their leader is dead now, killed by Utreshimon. The other clerics are panicking. They've been trapped in the moathouse dungeon for three days.

EVENTS DEVELOPMENT

If the PCs defeat or drive off the dragon and then leave, the clerics can move about as they wish. However, they
of the possible range of creatures encountered.

Day Encounter
Roll		Creature
01-60 	None
61-70	1d4 Wild dogs
71-80 	1d4 Giant Toads
81-85	Giant Constrictor Snake
86-90	1d4 brigands
91-95	1d4+1 hobgoblins
96-100	Giant crocodile

Night Encounter
Roll		Creature
01-40 	None
41-60	1d4 Will-o-wisps
61-70	1d4 Ghouls
71-80 	1d4 Ghouls and 1 Ghast
81-85	Yeth Hound
86-90	1d4 brigands
91-95	1d4+1 hobgoblins
96-100	Troll

Aside from such dangerous encounters, the PCs can see deer, badgers, snakes, quail, thrushes, blue jays, hawks,
field mice, ground squirrels, and insects. However, when they get close to the moathouse, they encounter few
animals of any size-a dragon has chased them away.

