For a period of many years a cult of chaotic evil flourished somewhere on the shores of the Myr Dyv.  Although
the location of the temple is lost, these facts regarding it, and its followers are known.

The cult was based on the premise that the elemental forces of the universe are chaotic
and opposed to mankind, i.e. evil. The temple of the cult sought to destroy all
works of good and disrupt order.  Its members were thieves, assassins, brigands,
and the like.  Fire was regarded as the first elemental evil, and its penchant
for chaotic occurrence fitted in with the premise of the cult.

Likewise, water was worshipped as an even more powerful force of chaotic evil, water in the
form of floods, storms, and raging seas, beating upon the land and sinking ships.  The
epitome of chaotic evil, however, was regarded as a combination of air and earth --
represented by black and corresponding with the Demonic Abyss.  This combination was regarded as the complete
negation of matter.

The cult grew powerful and rich, attracting the followers of the worse sort, and offering
safety to them within the walls of its temple stronghold.  From this fortress these
followers would ride forth to rob, pillage, and lay waste to the lands thereabout, tithing the cult with the spoils
of this brigandage.  Captives from these raids were brought back to the temple to serve as human sacrifices (children
to the fire, men to the water, women to the blacklist evil) or to slave their lives away in bondage.  Besides
the extensive upper works of the temple a deep labrynth beneath the place was constructed, but virtually nothing
 is now known about these dungeons other than that there were inhabited creatures serving both chaos and evil.
 It is rumored that a demon took up abode in the deepest level in order to better receive the sacrifices to him.

Eventually the neighbors of this temple grew tired of the depredations.  All good, lawful and
chaotic, banded together in the form of a mighty host.  Their army marched to the temple,
fighting two battles on the way.  The first was inconclusive, although the forces
of good held the field afterwards, so that they gained the reputation of victory,
and their ranks were swelled by may men from the area.  The second battle saw a great
slaughter of kobolds, goblins, orcs, hobgoblins, evil men, and the like.  The temple
was thereafter besieged, fell, and of its inhabitants were put to the sword.  It is
reported by some sources that the temple and its precincts resisted complete destruction,
but the majority state that the whole was razed so that the cult could never emerge again
nor find where it had once flourished.
